Add episode 39 (#332)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/39.md

---
layout: episode
title:  "39: Raft floats on Trino to federate silos"
date: 2022-08-16
tags: trino community user story
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections:

>    - title: "Releases 392"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - title: "Releases 392 and 393"
```

     desc: "Details about features and fixes in the new releases"
     time: 0
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Trino at Raft"
     time: 0
   - title: "Pull requests of the episode"
     desc: "PR 13354: Add S3 Select pushdown for JSON files"
     time: 0
   - title: "Demo of the episode"
     desc: "Running Great Expectations on a Trino Data Lakehouse Tutorial"
     time: 0
   - title: "Question of the episode"
     desc: "How can I deploy Trino on Kubernetes without using Helm chart?"
     time: 0
---

## Guests

In this episode we will be talking to two engineers from 
[Raft](https://goraft.tech/) who will discuss how they use Trino to connect data
silos that exist across different departments in various government sectors:

* [Edward Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/edwardwmorgan/), 
Senior Platform Engineer/DevSecOps Manager at Raft
* [Steve Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/steve-morgan-b9bb6642/), Chief
Data Engineer at Raft

> ## Releases 382 to 386

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Releases 392 and 393
```

> *

Reviewer: ```
Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 392](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-392.html)

* Support for dynamic filtering with fault-tolerant query execution.
* Support for correlated subqueries in `DELETE` queries.
* Support for Amazon S3 Select pushdown for JSON files.
* Support for Avro format in Iceberg connector.
* Faster queries when filtering by `__time` column in Druid.

[Trino 393](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-393.html)

* Add support for `MERGE`.
* TBD

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Manfred:

* Lots of other improvements on Delta Lake, Hive, and Iceberg connectors.
* Merge support in a bunch of connectors.
* OAuth 2.0 refresh token fixes

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 392](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-392.html),
and
[Trino 393](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-393.html).
```

     desc: "Running Great Expectations on a Trino Data Lakehouse Tutorial"
     time: 0
   - title: "Question of the episode"
     desc: "How can I deploy Trino on Kubernetes without using Helm chart?"
     time: 0
---

## Guests

In this episode we will be talking to two engineers from 
[Raft](https://goraft.tech/) who will discuss how they use Trino to connect data
silos that exist across different departments in various government sectors:

* [Edward Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/edwardwmorgan/), 
Senior Platform Engineer/DevSecOps Manager at Raft
* [Steve Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/steve-morgan-b9bb6642/), Chief
Data Engineer at Raft

## Releases 392 to 393

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 392](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-392.html)

* Support for dynamic filtering with fault-tolerant query execution.
* Support for correlated subqueries in `DELETE` queries.
* Support for Amazon S3 Select pushdown for JSON files.
* Support for Avro format in Iceberg connector.
* Faster queries when filtering by `__time` column in Druid.

[Trino 393](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-393.html)

* Add support for `MERGE`.

> * TBD

Reviewer: ```
* Improved performance of highly selective `LIMIT` queries.
* Experimental docker image for `ppc64le`.
* Dynamic filtering support for various connectors.
* Support for JSON and bytes type in Pinot.
```

     desc: "Details about features and fixes in the new releases"
     time: 314
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Trino at Raft"
     time: 728
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Software factory"
     time: 801
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Standards and anatomy of a stack"
     time: 984
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Data Fabric at Raft"
     time: 1138
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Security concerns around Trino"
     time: 1321
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Iron bank container repository"
     time: 1767
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Data Fabric user perspective"
     time: 2173
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Challenges for adoption"
     time: 2752
   - title: "Pull requests of the episode"
     desc: "PR 13354: Add S3 Select pushdown for JSON files"
     time: 3934
   - title: "Demo of the episode"
     desc: "Running Great Expectations on a Trino Data Lakehouse Tutorial"
     time: 4081
   - title: "Question of the episode"
     desc: "How can I deploy Trino on Kubernetes without using Helm chart?"
     time: 4435
---

## Guests

> In this episode, we will be talking to two engineers from 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this episode, we are talking to two engineers from 
```

> [Raft](https://goraft.tech/) who will discuss how they use Trino to connect data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Raft](https://goraft.tech/) and discuss how they use Trino to connect data
```

silos that exist across different departments in various government sectors:

* [Edward Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/edwardwmorgan/), 
Senior Platform Engineer/DevSecOps Manager at Raft
* [Steve Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/steve-morgan-b9bb6642/), Chief
Data Engineer at Raft

## Register for Trino Summit 2022!

> Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! It will be at the Commonwealth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! It will be held at the Commonwealth
```

Reviewer: also need to somehow mention remote attendance

> Club in San Francisco, CA on November 10th!  If you have a talk, the 

Reviewer: Maybe 

If you want to present

## Concept of the episode: Trino at Raft

Raft provides consulting services and is particularly skilled at DevSecOps. One
particular challenge they face is dealing with fragmented government
infrastructure. In this episode, we dive in to learn how Trino enables Raft to
supply government sector clients with a data fabric solution. Raft takes a
special stance on using and contributing to open source solutions that run well
on the cloud.

### Intro to software factories

> A “software factory” is an organized approach to software development that
provides software design and development teams a repeatable, well-defined path
to create and update software. It results in a robust, compliant, and more
resilient process for delivering applications to production" 
-- [VMWare](https://tanzu.vmware.com/software-factory)

This is a push against the previous attempts from larger government contractors
who tried to build one-size-fits-all solutions that ultimately failed. The new
wave of government solutions relies on methodologies similar to the software
industry that append more rules and standards around technologies they can adopt
in the stack.

> This is now a common practice for government agencies to use, as they are able

Reviewer: Software factories are now a

a single control plane for normalizing and combining disparate data lakes, 
platforms, silos, and formats into SQL using Trino for batch data and Apache 
Pinot for user facing streaming analytics. 
>
> Data Fabric is driven by cloud native policy using Open Policy Agent (OPA) 
integrated with Trino and Kafka to provide row and column level obfuscation. It
provides enterprise data catalog to view data lineage, properties, and data
owners from multiple data platforms. -- [Raft](https://datafabric.goraft.tech/)

### Security concerns around Trino

A common first question the Raft team gets asked is around Trino being a high
security concern. The idea that Trino can connect to multiple data sources from
one location brings up fear that individuals may gain access to information at
a higher classification level than they have. The team has to educate the
different users on the best practices and how to ensure this problem doesn't
occur. You will need a separate deployment of Data Fabric for each 
classification level and correctly identify policies in OPA that restrict
visibility to information above a users' clearance.

### Iron Bank container repository

> Iron Bank is a groundbreaking central repository of digitally-signed container 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Iron Bank is a central repository of digitally-signed container 
```

images, including open-source and commercial off-the-shelf software, hardened to
the DoD’s exacting specifications. Approved containers in Iron Bank have

> DoD-wide reciprocity across all classifications, accelerating down to weeks a 

Reviewer: accelerating the security approval process from months or even years down to weeks.

security process that can otherwise take months or even years.

To be considered for inclusion into Iron Bank, container images must meet
rigorous DoD software security standards. It is an extensive, continuous,
complicated effort for even the most sophisticated IT teams. Continuously
maintaining and managing hardening pipelines while incorporating evolving DoD
specifications and addressing new vulnerabilities (CVEs) can severely stretch
your resources, even if you have advanced tooling and experience in-house. 
([Source](https://oteemo.com/accelerate-to-iron-bank/))

The Trino Docker image 

> [is available in the Iron Bank](https://repo1.dso.mil/dsop?filter=trino) and is

Reviewer: in Iron Bank

> maintained by folks at Booz Allen Hamilton. Their hard work makes it possible

Reviewer: link to Booz Allen Hamilton ??

Expectations can run. Clone the 
[trino-datalake](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-datalake) 
repository and navigate to the root directory in your cli. Then 
start up the containers using Docker Compose.

```
git clone git@github.com:bitsondatadev/trino-datalake.git

cd trino-datalake

docker-compose up -d
```

The rest of the demo is available in 
[this markdown tutorial](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-datalake/blob/main/tutorials/expecting-greatness-from-trino.md)
and is covered in the video demo below.

<div class="youtube-video-container">
  <iframe width="702" height="405" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/h6UYOilESfQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

## Question of the episode: How can I deploy Trino on Kubernetes without using Helm charts?

[Full question from Trino Slack](https://trinodb.slack.com/archives/C0305TQ05KL/p1660685654979289)

This user was not able to use Helm, due to some restriction in his company. They
needed the raw kubernetes yaml files to deploy Trino.

> _Answer:_ While there are very nice ways that helm offers to directly deploy to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Answer:_ While there are very nice ways that Helm offers to directly deploy to
```

> a service that understands helm charts, you can also use helm on your machine to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a service that understands Helm charts, you can also use Helm on your machine to
```

     desc: "Details about features and fixes in the new releases"
     time: 314
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Trino at Raft"
     time: 728
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Software factory"
     time: 801
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Standards and anatomy of a stack"
     time: 984
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Data Fabric at Raft"
     time: 1138
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Security concerns around Trino"
     time: 1321
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Iron bank container repository"
     time: 1767
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Data Fabric user perspective"
     time: 2173
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Challenges for adoption"
     time: 2752
   - title: "Pull requests of the episode"
     desc: "PR 13354: Add S3 Select pushdown for JSON files"
     time: 3934
   - title: "Demo of the episode"
     desc: "Running Great Expectations on a Trino Data Lakehouse Tutorial"
     time: 4081
   - title: "Question of the episode"
     desc: "How can I deploy Trino on Kubernetes without using Helm chart?"
     time: 4435
---

## Guests

> In this episode we will be talking to two engineers from 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this episode, we will be talking to two engineers from 
```

[Raft](https://goraft.tech/) who will discuss how they use Trino to connect data
silos that exist across different departments in various government sectors:

* [Edward Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/edwardwmorgan/), 
Senior Platform Engineer/DevSecOps Manager at Raft
* [Steve Morgan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/steve-morgan-b9bb6642/), Chief
Data Engineer at Raft

## Register for Trino Summit 2022!

Trino Summit 2022 is coming around the corner! It will be at the Commonwealth
Club in San Francisco, CA on November 10th!  If you have a talk, the 
[call for speakers](https://sessionize.com/trino-summit-2022/) is open until
September 15th. 

> [Register for the conference](https://www.starburst.io/info/trinosummit/) at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[You can register for the conference](https://www.starburst.io/info/trinosummit/) at
```
otherwise this is a sentence fragment

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Manfred:

* Lots of other improvements on Delta Lake, Hive, and Iceberg connectors.
* Merge support in a bunch of connectors.
* OAuth 2.0 refresh token fixes

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 392](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-392.html),
and
[Trino 393](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-393.html).

## Concept of the episode: Trino at Raft

Raft provides consulting services and is particularly skilled at DevSecOps. One
particular challenge they face is dealing with fragmented government
infrastructure. In this episode, we dive in to learn how Trino enables Raft to
supply government sector clients with a data fabric solution. Raft takes a
special stance on using and contributing to open source solutions that run well
on the cloud.

### Intro Software Factories

A “software factory” is an organized approach to software development that
provides software design and development teams a repeatable, well-defined path
to create and update software. It results in a robust, compliant, and more
resilient process for delivering applications to production.

> ([Source](https://tanzu.vmware.com/software-factory))

Reviewer 2: Linking to a source like this seems a little strange. Is vmware.com an authority, or are we paraphrasing directly from them or something? Might flow better to say "according to VMWare" or something along those lines so we don't have a dangling (Source) at the end of the paragraph.

Author: Fair, yeah we're directly quoting from them. VMWare owns Pivotal which has a large amount of these government contracts. They are somewhat of an authority in this space it seems.

This is a push against the previous attempts from larger government contractors
who tried to build one-size-fits-all solutions that ultimately failed. The new
wave of government solutions relies on methodologies similar to the software
industry that append more rules and standards around technologies they can adopt
in the stack.

This is now a common practice for government agencies to use, as they are able
to take standardized software stacks that go through rigorous validation to make
sure the meet the standards of the government. One important element to these
stacks are that they can be deployed in virtually any environment. A common
way to do this is using Kubernetes and containers.

### Standards and anatomy of a stack

With the movement towards standardization, government contractors will generally

> build their stack using Kubernetes templates. Kubernetes is the underpins of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
build their stack using Kubernetes templates. Kubernetes underpins
```

> each of these stacks while monitoring, telemetry, and policy agents are layered

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
each of these stacks while telemetry, monitoring, and policy agents are layered
```
This ordering makes it more clear that 'monitoring' is a gerund when first reading it. With the original ordering, it may be read as a verb by some readers and feel a little jarring.

Author: wow...that's pretty neat...I like it :)

a single control plane for normalizing and combining disparate data lakes, 
platforms, silos, and formats into SQL using Trino for batch data and Apache 
Pinot for user facing streaming analytics. 

Data Fabric is driven by cloud native policy using Open Policy Agent (OPA) 
integrated with Trino and Kafka to provide row and column level obfuscation. It
provides enterprise data catalog to view data lineage, properties, and data
owners from multiple data platforms. ([Source](https://datafabric.goraft.tech/))

### Security concerns around Trino

A common first question the Raft team gets asked is around Trino being a high
security concern. The idea that Trino can connect to multiple data sources from
one location brings up fear that individuals may gain access to information at
a higher classification level than they have. The team has to educate the
different users on the best practices and how to ensure this problem doesn't
occur. You will need a separate deployment of Data Fabric for each 
classification level and correctly identify policies in OPA that restrict
visibility to information above a users' clearance.

> ### Iron bank container repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Iron Bank container repository
```

Iron Bank is a groundbreaking central repository of digitally-signed container 
images, including open-source and commercial off-the-shelf software, hardened to
the DoD’s exacting specifications. Approved containers in Iron Bank have
DoD-wide reciprocity across all classifications, accelerating down to weeks a 
security process that can otherwise take months or even years.

To be considered for inclusion into Iron Bank, container images must meet
rigorous DoD software security standards. It is an extensive, continuous,
complicated effort for even the most sophisticated IT teams. Continuously
maintaining and managing hardening pipelines while incorporating evolving DoD
specifications and addressing new vulnerabilities (CVEs) can severely stretch
your resources, even if you have advanced tooling and experience in-house. 
([Source](https://oteemo.com/accelerate-to-iron-bank/))

The Trino Docker image 
[is available in the Iron Bank](https://repo1.dso.mil/dsop?filter=trino) and is
maintained by folks at Booz Allen Hamilton. Their hard work makes it possible
for Trino to be deployed in DoD environments.

## Pull requests of the episode: PR 13354: Add S3 Select pushdown for JSON files

> This months [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13354) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This month's [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/13354) 
```

Author: Actually, we should say episode's...bad habits die hard.

> was contributed by [preethiratnam](https://github.com/preethiratnam). Enable S3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
was contributed by [preethiratnam](https://github.com/preethiratnam): Enable S3
```
Maybe put the link to the PR on the title? It's a little weird just having it floating out in space.

Author: Oops, I meant to actually make that a sentence, not the title :).

Select pushdown for JSON files. The pushdown logic is restricted to only root
JSON fields, similar to CSV. S3 Select does support nested column filtering on
JSON files, which is planned for another PR at a later time to limit the scope.

It's already expensive enough to query JSON files, as you pay a hefty penalty
for deserialization. This at least filters out a lot of rows. Thanks to 
[Andrii Rosa `arhimondr`](https://github.com/arhimondr) for the review.

## Demo of the episode: Running Great Expectations on a Trino Data Lakehouse Tutorial

> For this episode's demo, you'll need a local Trino coordinator, MinIO instance,
> and Hive metastore and an edge node where various data libraries like Great

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this episode's demo, you'll need a local Trino coordinator, MinIO instance,
Hive metastore, and an edge node where various data libraries like Great
```

Expectations can run. Clone the 
[trino-datalake](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-datalake) 
repository and navigate to the root directory in your cli. Then 
start up the containers using Docker Compose.

```
git clone git@github.com:bitsondatadev/trino-datalake.git

cd trino-datalake

docker-compose up -d
```

The rest of the demo is available in 
[this markdown tutorial](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-datalake/blob/main/tutorials/expecting-greatness-from-trino.md)
and is covered in the video demo below.

<div class="youtube-video-container">
  <iframe width="702" height="405" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/h6UYOilESfQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

> ## Question of the episode: How can I deploy Trino on Kubernetes without using Helm chart?

Reviewer 2: Should it be Helm charts?

Author: yes :)

[Trinetes episode]({{site.url}}/episodes/31.html) that details this command.

## Events, news, and various links

* [Raft Data Fabric](https://datafabric.goraft.tech/)
* [Raft Twitter](https://twitter.com/raft_tech)
* [Raft LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/company/raft-tech/)
* [Raft Jobs](https://boards.greenhouse.io/raft)

Blogs

* [Trino - SQL to rule them all](https://goraft.tech/2022/08/15/trino-sql-everything.html)
* [Raft wins USAF SBIR Phase III contract for data centralisation services](https://www.airforce-technology.com/news/raft-wins-usaf-sbir-phase-iii-contract/)
* [Raft Blog](https://goraft.tech/blog/)

Trino Meetup groups
 - Virtual
   - [Virtual Trino Americas](https://www.meetup.com/trino-americas/)
   - [Virtual Trino EMEA](https://www.meetup.com/trino-emea/)
   - [Virtual Trino APAC](https://www.meetup.com/trino-apac/)
 - East Coast (US)
   - [Trino Boston](https://www.meetup.com/trino-boston/)
   - [Trino NYC](https://www.meetup.com/trino-nyc/)
 - West Coast (US)
   - [Trino San Fransisco](https://www.meetup.com/trino-san-francisco/)
   - [Trino Los Angeles](https://www.meetup.com/trino-los-angeles/)
 - Mid West (US)

>    - [Trino Chicago](https://www.meetup.com/trino-chicago/)

Reviewer 2: Manfred wanted this simplified. I think you can refer back to what I posted for this on episode 38.
